Welcome back everyone.
This lecture on time resampling will usually get financial data that has a date time index on a smaller
time scale.
That is something like every row corresponds to every day or every hour.
However it's often a good idea for analysis purposes to aggregate that data based off some sort of frequency
such as doing an aggregation on monthly data or quarterly data.
Now you may think that using a group buy could solve part of the issue.
You would just simply do a group buy and then buy every three months and that will give you quarterly
data.
However a simple GROUP BY statement isn't really smart enough to understand things like business quarters
or business year starts or the fact that Business Week starts on Monday instead of Sunday.
That sort of thing.
Luckily Pandurs has frequency sampling tools built into it to actually help with this sort of problem.
To learn about this we're going to be using a stock market data set of Wal-Mart prices.
It's located under the time data folder under the five dash panels with time series folder that corresponds
to the section of the course.
Let's open up into Jupiter notebook and get started.
OK here I am at my Jupiter notebook I've imported the usual suspects here num PI Panchos and map plot
lib and we're going to continue by reading in our data.
I want to show you two methods of reading in the data.
One is a little longer and it's a little more customizable.
The other one is a little faster.
So we're going to say is DMF is equal to PD the read CSFB and then we'll passen the actual file path
depending on where you are your file path may be different but aren't going to say time data Wal-Mart's
doxies V.
This matches the notes and I will read this in and if I check out the head of my data frame I can see
you have a couple of columns here and note here that there's a date column and the date column is what
I actually want to be the index.
So if I take a look at the date column.
Actually if we take a look at the entire data frame we just dig up the info.
I can see the date column is actually says non-nil object which indicates that this is still just a
string.
It's not a date time object.
So we need to convert this to a Date Time object and that's actually quite simple of pandas.
There's different ways of doing this but the simplest way is to say DSF date and set it equal to PD.
And there's a special To date time function and you can passen an entire series such as the original
date.
And what this is going to do is you're passing in the original series of the date which is just strings
and PD to date time is going to reformat it to be a Date Time object and then set that to date.
Now luckily for us this string is already in the standard notation.
It expects a year dash a month dash a day.
But in case you have a different notation for your specific date string what you can do is under PD
to date time.
If you do shifts have here you'll notice there's a format argument and this format argument basically
takes in a string that essentially tells Pancho's what format it's in.
So if you scroll down here there's an example what that string would look like.
So it keeps rolling downhill format.
So this is just a string telling you what format to expect that in.
So in this case the sort of string says Okay expect a day then a forward slash then a month than a forward
slash.
Then a year.
And there's actually different types of special characters that start with those percent signs that
tells those what kind of day or what kind of month to expect.
So for instance the difference between percent signed lowercase Y are the last two digits of a year.
Percent sign uppercase y.
Those are the fool for just a year etc. and you can look this up in the Panas documentation or on the
provided note books for what these key terms are this per cent sign.
Keep term.
Luckily for us we don't really need to provide that information because saurian the standard format.
So it's going to hit enter here and then check out the head of our data frame.
Notice it looks the same but when I say that info I can see that it's now a date time object.
So we have that ready to go.
Now another way you could do this possibly is instead of saying PD to date time and then pass in the
series.
You could also just apply P-T to date times.
Every element in the series.
So do something like dates apply and then call PD to that time.
I've seen that as well.
And then you just set something like this.
So it's really up to you these perform the exact same function.
I would recommend doing it this way with PD to date time and then pass on the series to me that's a
little more readable.
But either way should be fine.
And let me delete everything in the cell and then clear it out.
OK.
So we have our new date column and now no longer just a string but it's actually a date time object
which means we should be able to set it as the index so I can say set index and then in date.
I also want call this in place.
True.
So if I take a look at my data frame I can see I have now the date time index and then do various columns.
So that's kind of the longer more manual way but it gives you a lot more control especially of this
PD today.
Time lets you have full control over whatever format that dates in.
If you actually want to read in the dates as an index since the very beginning you could have just appear
specified PD that read V and you can also add in an argument index underscore column and specify that
the index column is the date.
However keep in mind that this will still read it in as a string and you have to reformat the actual
index to be a Date Time object.
Now one additional thing to note here is that pandas actually comes with another parameter you can add
in to read CSP that will actually do this parsing of data for you.
And that's going to be parse underscore dates and you can set it to true.
And what this does is if you provide an index arguments such as set the date column to be the index
location parse dates set to true will automatically Trius best to parse this column as a Date Time object.
So let's try this out.
Well Re-Read our data frame and then if I check out the index it is now a date time index.
So this is the faster way.
It's not as controllable as the way we just showed up the step by step.
But if your data is already an expected format this will save you a lot of time just passing your data
set the column date and then say parse dates equal to true.
There's other things you can do have parse dates such as adding in an actual list of columns to try
to parse things of that nature.
You can always check the documentation for more details.
So we'll just stick it this way in this column parse that's equal to true.
And I'm going to scroll all the way down here come back toward the F enter and everything's the same.
So let's continue along and start talking about time resampling.
So to do any sort of time resampling we're going to need a date time index.
So if we scroll down here all the weights.
This next empty cell.
Again just a reminder we have a date time index what I can then do is off this data frame say re sample
and then provide what's known as a rule and the rule is just indicating how do you actually want to
read sample this data.
So for instance I can say rule is equal to the letter A.
And then if I run this I'll say OK a date time index rose sampler.
And this is essentially acting as a group by method specific to time series data that is Date Time objects
and there's keywords for every kind of possible series offset that you could think of.
So I want to bring in a little table that's available to you in the corresponding notes for this lecture.
So we bring in from my right hand side of the screen.
So there's a little table here that is available to you in your notes.
And there's an alias corresponding to every single type of description and you can see there's dozens
here that are very very useful.
We're just using a.
Which is year and the frequency.
So we can expect the last day of the year as our resampling.
So we'll bring this aside now.
And you'll notice here you have a time index free sampler saying OK it's resampling based on the end
of the year but any sort of resampling is going to need an aggregate method to actually give some sort
of result which means essentially operating like a group by you can then say something like mean.
And now what this will do is it gives you the mean value based off the resampling of the end of year.
So everything before 2012 12:31 had a mean of 67 everything between 2012 12:31 and 2013 12:31 at the
end of year had a mean of 75 etc. and you can just keep doing this for different resampling.
So I can do another resampling rule let's try doing a quarterly one.
So you would look up in that table and then you would realize it's you.
Some of them have obvious Lutter some of them don't.
And then you would get now quarterly sampling.
So here we have quarterly resampling and then you can also do business quarter and frequencies.
You can do something like BQ for business quarters.
That means based off of your business quarters which may slightly end the dates if it's the end of quarters
or Friday that sort of thing instead of just they ran them Saturday.
So that's important to know as far as the different rules that you can apply and you can actually also
apply your own custom functions to any of these samples just as you could if any group by method.
So let me show you what I mean by that.
Scroll down here.
If I say read sample and I give it a rule to be sure to end the year again and ask for the max that's
going to return the max price per that year basically ending it on the last day of the year.
But let's say I actually wanted to return the first instance of the period regardless of any sampling
rate what I can then do is instead of Max I'll define my own function.
Or you could even do this as a lamb expression depending on the complexity of it all create a function
called first day and it takes in some entry.
In this case we kind of expect the series here.
And then it's just going to return entry zero.
So indexing the very first entry off of this.
So this is called first day.
And instead of doing Max here once I've ran this and the find the first thing I can say OK take my data
frame resampling based off the year end and then instead of calling Max or mean or deviation that sort
of thing I will just apply my own kind of time series function which is called first day and no I'm
not calling it I'm just passing it in so I'm not executing it of princes.
I'm just passing it in like this.
So now what this does is it returns the very first sample or entry for this particular time period.
OK.
So let's show you what you could do with visualization with these samplings.
It's not super common to have to do your own applications this way.
As far as doing it to apply because most of the things you want already built in but just keep that
in mind it is possible that moving along to the visualisations want to show you kind of two quick visualizations
illustrating why you would want to do something like this.
Let's say you actually wanted the kind of yearly and the mean.
How would you do that.
Well you could ask for the close column and then you can call the sample not just offer data frame but
actually off the series or the column itself and then we'll sample with a.
And then I'm going to ask for the mean of the closing price and then it's going to do a bar plot.
So same plots kind as equal to bar so you can see our output here gives us a nice little bar plot indicating
the mean or average for those years themselves.
And we can kind of edit this to sample for instance by the month.
So let's say I'm here and if I run this now I get this monthly kind of average.
So you can see there's a big dip in sales there now formatting wise you're going to use all your map
Cutlip skills to reformat this but also do something like just a bigger fix size specific size 16 Comus
6.
I don't know that may be quite large but OK here a year.
And it kind of a nice little figure here can see the dip in monthly sales et cetera.
So that's the kind of thing you would be using for resampling.
Now note that I'm using a bar plot because technically these are all categorical points.
This is not a continuous value because the dates are actually holding some sort of aggregate method
on them.
So keep that in mind.
This is not a continuous plot.
This is a bar plot.
So it's a little different than something like a histogram.
OK thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture.